File and Directory Management

ls – Lists files and directories in the current location.
cd /path/to/directory – Changes the working directory.
pwd – Prints the current working directory.
mkdir new_folder – Creates a new directory.
rmdir empty_folder – Removes an empty directory.
rm file.txt – Deletes a file.
rm -r folder – Deletes a folder and its contents.
cp file1.txt file2.txt – Copies a file.
cp -r dir1 dir2 – Copies a directory recursively.
mv old_name new_name – Moves or renames a file or directory.

File Viewing and Editing

cat file.txt – Displays file content.
tac file.txt – Displays file content in reverse order.
less file.txt – Opens a file for viewing with scrolling support.
more file.txt – Similar to less, but only moves forward.
head -n 10 file.txt – Displays the first 10 lines of a file.
tail -n 10 file.txt – Displays the last 10 lines of a file.
nano file.txt – Opens a simple text editor.
vi file.txt – Opens a powerful text editor.
echo 'Hello' > file.txt – Writes text to a file, overwriting existing content.
echo 'Hello' >> file.txt – Appends text to a file without overwriting.

Viewing Processes

ps(processes status)
ps aux or ps – View all running processes. displays the detailed list of all running processes on the system.

a - shows process for all users,not just the current user
u -displays process user or owner alng with detailed info
x - prcess that are not attatched to a terminal 

Ps command presents the snapshot of the every process running including system services and prcesses without a terminal.
user- user or wner of the process
PID-process id
%CPU-CPU usage
%MEM- memory used by process
VSZ- virtual memory size
RSS-physical memory size used
STAT- process status
START-start time
TIME-CPU time consumed
command-command that is used by process


ps -u username – View processes for a specific user
ps -C processname – Show a process by name
pgrep processname – Find a process by name and return its PID
pidof processname – Find the PID of a running program

Managing Processes

kill PID – Terminate a process by PID
pkill processname – Terminate a process by name
kill -9 PID – Force kill a process
pkill -9 processname – Kill all instances of a process
kill -STOP PID – Stop a running process
kill -CONT PID – Resume a stopped process



Monitoring System Processes

top – Interactive process viewer. Real time tool which provides a live view of running processes and systm resource usage. shows an interactive list of running process updates evey few seconds.
provides option to send signals of processes eg to kill or stop them directly from the interface.

htop – User-friendly process viewer (requires installation)
nice -n 10 command – Run a command with a specific priority
renice -n -5 -p PID – Change priority of an existing process

Daemon Process Management

systemctl list-units --type=service – List all system daemons
systemctl start service-name – Start a daemon/service
systemctl stop service-name – Stop a daemon/service
systemctl enable service-name – Enable a service at startup
